bill gates thank you very much for
joining us on BBC Breakfast I just
wonder if I could first ask you how
important is it now to have a global
response well I'd say it's critical
because the tools that are going to
reduce deaths the drugs you know that's
a global thing to get those out and the
thing that will get us back to the world
that we had before coronavirus is the
vaccine and getting that out to all 7
billion people and so the efforts to
test those to build the factories to
understand you know is it safe and ready
to go that's a global problem and you
know so I I'm glad you know that people
are coming together to find where is the
best work and combine that you know the
factory will be in a different country
than the science is in this is the whole
whole world working on probably the most
urgent tool that's ever been needed can
I ask you to just reflect a little more
on the the way the world leaders thus
far have responded to the crisis well
there's the period when I and other
health experts were saying that this is
the greatest potential downfall the
world faced you know going back quite a
ways with a speech in 2015 and a New
England Journal of Medicine article
about the specific thing so you know we
definitely will look back and wish we
had invested more so that we could
quickly have all the diagnostics drugs
and vaccines so you know we under
invested which was my goal was was to
get that to happen we did Duceppe which
helped with some of the vaccine
platforms but not even 5 percent what we
could have done
then there's the period where the virus
shows up in those first few months you
know what were the tests prepared you
know did countries think through
getting their ICU and ventilator
capacity up there'll be time for those
post-mortems
you know very few countries are gonna
get an a-grade for what that scrambling
looked like and now here we are you know
we we didn't simulate this we didn't
practice so both the health policies and
economic policies we find ourselves in
unchartered territory I know what are
the messages you're you're very keen to
put out there is is about that there
should be more international cooperation
can you try to give us a sense of what
that you think should look like in
practice well the court of iris is going
through waves the first wave was very
much China and now there's a wave that
almost all of the rich countries are
experiencing very challenging epidemics
hopefully by early summer of the right
type of isolation policies and testing
policies have been implemented a lot of
the countries will be beyond the peak
and looking at opening back up
sadly the developing countries whose yet
don't have huge number of cases are
likely to have the worst of it because
their ability isolate the capacity their
health system is far less than in in the
rich countries and so the global
cooperation is to help those countries
and by helping them make sure the
disease isn't spreading back to the
other countries and then to supercharge
the therapeutics and vaccine work which
will involve expertise from all over the
globe do you think there's a very real
risk then as leaders of developed
countries try and deal with the
situation the crisis in their own
countries that not enough thought will
go to those places you mentioned before
that this stage possibly haven't been
thought about enough well certainly you
know say we get a therapeutic that's
partially effective it'll be in short
supply you know what will the ow
allocation be likewise for the
vaccine I do think that because the peak
in the developing countries is coming
later than in the rich countries you
know countries like you know European
countries China the US we can take some
of the you know may ask and ventilator
and other things that have been ramped
up and make sure that we keep making
those things but then they'll be needed
we'll have to ship those in developing
countries and we're seeing you know
China stepping up a bit in that way
already when you talk about a
therapeutic you're talking about a
vaccine I'm assuming is that right no I
used therapeutic for treating somebody
who's hills so that would be like you
know maybe although the evidence is very
very weak hydroxychloroquine Ramdass
appear there's antivirals antibodies all
sorts of things the foundation created
the therapeutics accelerator that's
looking literally at thousands of things
that you would give that you treat
somebody that is only after you get sick
and of course the vaccine is a
protective to prevent you from getting
sick now can I ask you in relation to
the vaccine I know you've donated a sum
of money in relation to that just talk
me through how what do you think of the
key elements around developing a
successful vaccine is it money is it
political will what do you think of the
key elements to that well we definitely
need to fund the research and the
manufacturing in the distribution the
distribution piece for developing
countries will be gobbing where the UK's
always been super generous on that the
research will need to fund about ten the
ten most promising constructs because we
won't know in advance which one will
prove to be safe and effective and being
effective for older people whose immune
system is weak is a huge challenge if
you really amp up the vaccine to do that
then you can run into safety issues so
we're gonna have to take something that
usually takes five or six years and get
it done in 18 months there are there is
an approach called an
RNA vaccine that people like moderna
cure back and several others have that
looks quite promising but we can't count
on that so while back you know four or
five of those and four or five companies
using a more conventional approach which
unfortunately that schedule for that
would probably not be as quick as if
this RNA platform that you know we've
been funding directly and through sepi
over the last decade you'll be aware a
lot of people in the UK are asking what
is a very simple and straightforward
question which is when will there be a
vaccine what how do you see that well
it's a perfect question because we want
to get back to the life we had before
coronavirus and you know people are
seeing the the economic discretion
destruction the psychological stress you
know this is such an unprecedented very
tough thing to deal with the people like
myself and Tony Fauci are saying
eighteen months if everything went
perfectly we could do slightly better
than that
but there will be a trade-off will have
less safety testing than we typically
would have and so governments will have
to decide you know do they indemnify the
companies and really say let's let's go
out with this when it's we just don't
have the time to do what we normally do
so 18 months is about what we'd expect
we're doing everything we can you know
we'll write checks for those factories
faster than governments can and they'll
come along it definitely shouldn't be
money limited it should should be you
know all the best constructs full-speed
I had science limited as I understand it
them from what you're saying is that it
may be that there needs to be some
compromise in some of the the safety
measures that Met would normally be
expected to create a vaccine because
time is so crucial well of course of you
if you want to wait and see if a side
effect shows up two years later that
takes two years so whenever you're
acting quickly like during the HIV
crisis they created a
a quick way of getting drug approval
there is a trade-off there in that case
it worked super super well and here you
know we have we will I think be able to
get some safety indications but this is
a public good and so you know those
trade-offs the government's working on a
cooperative basis will be involved in
the decision to say hey the regulator
says go ahead even though you haven't
taken the normal time Korean do you
think world leaders now listening in a
way they didn't out of necessity bearing
in mind and I know you referenced it
before 2015 you gave one of those TED
talks and if people go back and listen
to it now it was extraordinarily close
to what is happening now you were
talking about the real risk of a
pandemic across the world did you feel
like you were listened to then no the
investments that could have been done so
that diagnostics would have been
essentially immediately available drugs
in less than half the time the vaccine
in less than half the time most of those
investments were not made now sepi is
the exception to that but that's about
5% of what could have been done
now we're scrambling and it's taking us
much longer to get these pieces together
even though scientists are doing heroic
work so you know unlike the defense
budget that prepares us for wars where
we simulate the problem when we make
sure we're good at it
this risk which I viewed is even greater
than the risk of war there was very very
little preparation very few of these
germ games where you try out and say
okay how do you build up the ICU
capacity you know can you make
ventilators how do you prioritize the
Diagnostics that we're just figuring out
as we go do you think that what was that
do you think a partly a financial
decision that they that it wasn't deemed
to be worth investing that money in
something that maybe other people didn't
see as clearly as you well it's got to
be government's because you there's no
privates
or incentive for something that's
uncertain like this and even when it
happens you you know you have to charge
mostly a break-even price for things
that are helping out with a a global
crisis like this so you know people
still saw war as something to fund in
the less than 10% - that that would have
been needed for this you know people
just didn't organize their government to
have that that function I do think now
because this has been so dramatic you
know we weren't ready for this pandemic
but I do think we will be ready for the
next pandemic and using the new tools of
science that's very very doable well it
was that really was my next question I
mean given what you said in 2015 and you
were very clear people didn't listen do
you are you optimistic that now and
obviously we need to get out of the
immediate situation but there will be a
different mindset around that the fears
around viruses and pandemics yeah your
speed of reaction is so crucial here
because it grows exponentially you know
if you're there two months earlier which
some countries jumped on this faster
than others you know they really were
checking to see if there was community
spread they got the Diagnostics capacity
up quickly but you know we should be
able to have Diagnostics within a month
we should have be able to have
therapeutics in more like four months
and a vaccine less than a year if we're
on standby with the right factories and
the right science and we should have
rehearsed how we deal with all these
shortages with working together so a
really good system foreseen this early
and making sure we jump on it before the
curve gets to a meaningful part of the
population that is achievable I know you
you reflected for a moment on this
earlier on the interview and it is
inevitable that here in the UK we asked
our politicians questions about the way
they've reacted and to a degree it's
inevitable that those that thought
process will be
it happens in the future that we look
back on I mean can you talk us through
what you see from from what's happened
so far well they a big missing piece is
that you know funding the research for
these types of vaccines
you know actually our foundation is the
biggest funder of vaccines for
infectious disease you know there could
have been more sepi is the one thing
that that did happen there and you know
now the next phase is once we get the
cases way down how much can we open up
and that now there is an opportunity for
governments to see what others are doing
to see which ones do run into a rebound
of the disease and really share these
deep understandings you know like do
young or young people part of the
infection chain you know so I do think
we'll we will deal with this opening up
phase in a more collaborative
data-driven way than that the first
scramble where sadly you know many
governments were were slow to react can
I just ask you finally on a personal
note I mean one of the things that we've
all become very aware of is viruses know
no boundaries and everyone is affected
we are all human beings and I just
wonder you know for you yourself looking
at what's happening around the world and
also literally in a personal sense you
know with your friends and family when
how has it been for you well I think
everyone's life is completely disrupted
you know your normal pattern of you go
to meetings you know watch sports events
this thing you know in my lifetime this
is the most dramatic thing and you know
so now we're having to think through how
do we rise to the occasion you know get
get the scientists working together I'm
doing video meetings I hardly see people
at all you know I ask myself every
morning did this really happen and even
though I were
about it I still find it it's shocking
how how tufted tough it is and how hard
it's going to be to get back to the
normal life that we had before
on that note and on that note if normal
do you think things will go back to
normal
or is that all changed no the once you
have a safe and effective vaccine and
get that out almost all of the people on
the planet and build the preparatory
systems for the next pandemic so you can
nip it in the bud we will go back to
normal and economies will recover but we
have multiple stages to go through in
terms of until we have that you know how
much can we open up how do we help the
developing countries but the economy
eventually will go back to where it was
and innovation will help us not be at
such a risk in the years after that Bill
Gates very good to speak to you thank
you very much for your time thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News